Create WGS (#15)
fhdsl/Choosing_Genomics_Tools: 06a-WGS.Rmd

## Comparing WGS to other modalities

```{r, fig.alt = "Comparing WGS to other sequencing modalities. The most common DNA sequencing techniques are described. Whole genome sequencing coverages all genes and non-coding DNA. 3.2 billion bases are covered when applied to human samples. This the most expensive of the techniques. Depth of coverage required for 99.9% sensitivity is 30X. Whole exome sequencing coverage is the exome or expressed genes. Approximately 45 million bases are sequenced. This is a cost-effective technique. The depth of coverage required for 99.9% sensitivity is 100X. Targeted gene panel sequencing coverages 50-500 genes. 20,000 to 62 million bases are sequenced. This is the most cost-effective technique. Depth of coverage is >500X.", out.width = "100%", echo = FALSE}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1YwxXy2rnUgbx_7B7ENH9wpDX-j6JpJz6lGVzOkjo0qY/edit#slide=id.g138a6ce16b7_35_18")
```

> Compared to WES and targeted gene sequencing, WGS is the most expensive but requires the lowest depth of coverage to achieve 99.9% sensitivity. In other words, WGS requires sequencing each region of the genome (3.2 billion bases) 30 times in order to confidently be able to pick up all possible meaningful variants.

Reviewer: I think we still more resources for this paragraph @cmills2 -- Where did biorender get these stats? Or can we find other papers and information about this comparison?

```
This slide outlines the necessary steps to key steps in performing WGS. First, DNA is extracted from a specific sample type (tissue, blood samples, cells, FFPE blocks, etc.). Either traditional (involving phenol and chloroform) or commercial kits can be used for this first step. Next, the DNA sequencing libraries are prepared. This involves fragmenting the DNA, adding sequencing adapters, and DNA amplification if the input DNA is not of sufficient quantity. After sequencing, data is analyzed by converting and aligning reads to generate a BAM file. Many analysis tools will use the BAM file to identify variants, which then generates a VCF file.

## WGS Data Pre-processing

```{r, fig.alt = "WGS data pre-processing pipeline overview: Raw data from sequencing is transformed into a Fastq file, reads are aligned and a Bam file is created, the data is sorted and merged, duplicates are identified, and the base quality score is recalibrated to create a final BAM file ", out.width = "100%", echo = FALSE}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1YwxXy2rnUgbx_7B7ENH9wpDX-j6JpJz6lGVzOkjo0qY/edit#slide=id.g138a6ce16b7_35_38")
```

> To expand on the last slide, raw sequencing reads are first transformed into a fastq file. Then the sequencing reads are aligned to a reference genome to create a BAM file. This data is sorted and merged, and PCR duplicates are identified. The confidence that each read was sequenced correctly is reflected in the base quality score. This score must be recalibrated at this step before variants are called. A final BAM file is thus created. This can be used for future analysis steps include variant or mutation identification, which is outlined on the following slide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Raw sequencing reads are first transformed into a fastq file. Then the sequencing reads are aligned to a reference genome to create a BAM file. This data is sorted and merged, and PCR duplicates are identified. The confidence that each read was sequenced correctly is reflected in the base quality score. This score must be recalibrated at this step before variants are called. A final BAM file is thus created. This can be used for future analysis steps include variant or mutation identification, which is outlined on the following slide.
```

Link back to chapter I linked to above to where we previously talked about fastq files.

## Commonly Used Tools

```{r, fig.alt = "Tools commonly used in WGS data analysis", out.width = "100%", echo = FALSE}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1YwxXy2rnUgbx_7B7ENH9wpDX-j6JpJz6lGVzOkjo0qY/edit#slide=id.g138a6ce16b7_35_43")
```

> The following link provides the data analysis pipeline written by researchers in the NCI division of the NIH and provides a helpful overview of the typical steps necessary for [WGS analysis](https://docs.gdc.cancer.gov/Data/Bioinformatics_Pipelines/DNA_Seq_Variant_Calling_Pipeline/).

Reviewer: 🎉 👍

> 

Reviewer: Can we add a general paragraph in the beginning of each of these sections that gives the big overview of what these different groups of tools we are about to go through do? For example, for the `copy number variation analysis` tools. What's the overarching goal of these tools and what do they all generally do (or not do?)?

Here are many of the tools and resources used by researchers for analyzing WGS data.

> First, these are common tools for data pre-processing:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Tools for data pre-processing:
```

Reviewer: I'm adding these headers because it will make it easier for folks to navigate this important section! These headers will add these sections to the outline as well as make it so users can get links to each section.

- [Bedtools](https://bedtools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) including the bamtofastq function, which is the first step in converting data off the sequencer to a useable format for downstream analysis
- [Samtools](http://www.htslib.org/) including tools for converting fastq to BAM files while mapping genes to the genome, duplicate read marking, and sorting reads
- [Picard2](https://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/) including tools to covert fastq to SAM files, filter files, create indices, mark read duplicates, sort files, and merge files
- [GATK](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us) is a comprehensive set of tools from the Broad Institute for analyzing many types of sequencing data. For pre-processing, the print read function is very beneficial for writing the reads from a BAM or SAM file that pass specific criteria to a new file

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Tools for somatic and germline variant identification
```

> These are the common tools used for somatic and germline variant identification. Note many researchers will often use a combination of these tools to narrow down only variants that are identified using a combination of these analysis algorithms:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are the common tools used for somatic and germline variant identification. Note many researchers will often use a combination of these tools to narrow down only variants that are identified using a combination of these analysis algorithms:  

```

Reviewer: The bullet points aren't formatting correctly. I think if you add an extra space here they will render properly (I have this happen to me all the time 😄 )

> - [Mutect2](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/9570422171291-Mutect2) This is a beneficial variant calling tool with functions including using a "panel of normals" to better compare disease samples to normal and filtering functions for samples with orientation bias artifacts (FFPE samples) called F1R2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Mutect2](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/9570422171291-Mutect2) This is a beneficial variant calling tool with functions including using a "panel of normals" to better compare disease samples to normal and filtering functions for samples with orientation bias artifacts (FFPE samples) called F1R2
```
Is this "panel of normals" something the user has to provide or something that Mutect2 has in it already. Can you link to what `F1R2` is? I've not heard of this.

Author: I've added a clarification about the panel of normals but the F1R2 information is in the same page linked for Mutect2 - it doesn't have its own page so I just added that it is explained there

Reviewer: Okay. Sounds good! Thanks!

> - [Varscan 2](https://varscan.sourceforge.net/) This is a helpful tool that utilizes a heuristic/statistic approach to variant calling. It is generally used and has capabilities for calling multi-sample variants. It can also be used for identifying copy number alterations in tumor-normal pairs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Varscan 2](https://varscan.sourceforge.net/) This is a helpful tool that utilizes a heuristic/statistic approach to variant calling. It is generally used and has capabilities for calling multi-sample variants. It can also be used for identifying copy number alterations in tumor-normal pairs. 
```

Can we explain in practical terms what it means for the user that this uses a "heuristic/statistic" approach? Don't the other callers also use stats of sorts? How is this different from other callers?

> - [MuSE](https://bioinformatics.mdanderson.org/public-software/muse/) This is a beneficial mutation calling tool when you have both tumor and normal datasets. It uses a Markov Substitution model for Evolution, which models the evolution of the allelic composition of the tumor and normal tissue at each reference base. 

Reviewer: Can we link to more info on `Markov Substitution model for Evolution` and put a brief plain language summary here about what that means for the user in practical terms? 

Also for `when you have both tumor and normal datasets.` Do the other callers not do this?

Author: some callers require both tumor and normal so those are the ones where I describe the need for both but some of them have functions to use just the tumor data

> - [SvABA](https://github.com/walaj/svaba) This tool is especially useful for calling insertions and deletions (indels) because it utilizes a String Graph Assembler to assemble aberrantly aligned sequence reads that reflect indels or structural variants. Indels can be difficult to detect with standard alignment-based variant callers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [SvABA](https://github.com/walaj/svaba) This tool is especially useful for calling insertions and deletions (indels) because it utilizes a String Graph Assembler to assemble aberrantly aligned sequence reads that reflect indels or structural variants. Indels can be difficult to detect with standard alignment-based variant callers. 
```
I love the sentence about Indels, because that really tells me why I might want to use SvABA -- aka if I'm interested in indels. 
I have similar comment here about `String Graph Assembler` what does this mean to me as a user? And can we link to more info?

> - [Strelka](https://github.com/Illumina/strelka) This is a small variant caller designed by illumina. It is used for identifying germline variants in cohorts of samples and somatic variants in tumor/normal sample pairs. 

Reviewer: I believe its Strelka2 these days? 
```suggestion
- [Strelka2](https://github.com/Illumina/strelka) This is a small variant caller designed by Illumina. It is used for identifying germline variants in cohorts of samples and somatic variants in tumor/normal sample pairs. 
```

- [SomaticSniper](https://gmt.genome.wustl.edu/packages/somatic-sniper/) SomaticSniper can be used to identify SNPs in tumor/normal pairs. It calculates the probability that the tumor and normal genotypes are different and reports this probability as a somatic score. 

> - [Pindel](https://www.sanger.ac.uk/tool/pindel/) Pindel is a tool that uses a pattern growth approach to detect breakpoints of large deletions, medium size insertsion/inversion, tandem duplications. 

Reviewer: We will want to make sure to feature Lancet: https://github.com/nygenome/lancet Not only is it a pretty decent caller [with a nice paper that compares its methods to these other callers](https://www.nature.com/articles/s42003-018-0023-9) , but it's also ITCR funded I believe.

Author: Sorry I took this one off - I couldn't find the information about it anywhere - thanks for adding the link!

Reviewer: Selfishly I also kinda want to plug this snv caller analysis I've done where we compared these callers -- the code is all open source so folks can borrow any parts of it: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis/tree/master/analyses/snv-callers

> Here are commonly used variant calling annotation tools: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Tools for variant calling annotation 

```

Reviewer: These are databases in general that have a ton of annotation. We may want to point folks to *how* they might use this annotation or where they can find the specific files.

Reviewer: Annotation could honestly be its own chapter because nearly every genomic data analysis ends up needing to use some annotation in some way.

Author: that makes sense!

- [Annovar](https://annovar.openbioinformatics.org/en/latest/) This is a helpful tool for annotating, filtering, and combining the output data from the above tools. It can be used for gene-based, region-based, or filter-based annotations. 
- [GENCODE](https://www.gencodegenes.org/#) This tool can be used to identify and classify gene features in human and mouse genomes. 
- [dbSNP](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp/) This is a resource to look up specific human single nucleotide variations, microsatellites, and small-scale insertions and deletions. 
- [Ensembl](https://uswest.ensembl.org/index.html) This resource is a genome browser for annotating genes from a wide variety of species. 

> These are some of the commonly used copy number variation analysis tools: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Tools for copy number variation analysis

```

> - [GATK](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360035531092--How-to-part-I-Sensitively-detect-copy-ratio-alterations-and-allelic-segments) GATK has a variety of tools that ca nbe used to study changes in copy numbers of genes. This link provides a tutorial for how to use the tools. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [GATK](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360035531092--How-to-part-I-Sensitively-detect-copy-ratio-alterations-and-allelic-segments) GATK has a variety of tools that can be used to study changes in copy numbers of genes. This link provides a tutorial for how to use the tools. 
```
Yay! I like the tutorial link!

> - [AscatNGS](https://www.crick.ac.uk/research/labs/peter-van-loo/software) This tools (allele-specific copy number analysis of tumors) is specific for WGS copy number variation analysis. It can be used to dissect allele-specific copy numbers of tumors by estimating and adjusting for tumor ploidy and nonaberrant cell admixture.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [AscatNGS](https://www.crick.ac.uk/research/labs/peter-van-loo/software) These tools (allele-specific copy number analysis of tumors) are specific for WGS copy number variation analysis. It can be used to dissect allele-specific copy numbers of tumors by estimating and adjusting for tumor ploidy and nonaberrant cell admixture.  
```

> - [TitanCNA](https://github.com/gavinha/TitanCNA) This tool, developed by Fred Hutch Principal Investigator Dr. Gavin Ha, is used to analyze copy number variation and loss of heterozygoisity at the subclonal level for both WGS and WES data in tumors compared to matched normals. This tool accounts for mixtures of cell populations and estimates the proportion of cells harboring each event. The Ha lab has developed a [snakemake pipeline](https://github.com/gavinha/TitanCNA/tree/master/scripts/snakemake) to more easily use this tool.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [TitanCNA](https://github.com/gavinha/TitanCNA) This tool, developed by Fred Hutch Principal Investigator Dr. Gavin Ha, is used to analyze copy number variation and loss of heterozygoisity at the subclonal level for both WGS and WES data in tumors compared to matched normals. This tool accounts for mixtures of cell populations and estimates the proportion of cells harboring each event. The Ha lab has developed a [snakemake pipeline](https://github.com/gavinha/TitanCNA/tree/master/scripts/snakemake) to more easily use this tool.   
```

This is the only time you've mentioned who developed a tool. And while I understand why you are mentioning that we may need to be a little more subtle about it. Can we link to the paper and put that at the end of the paragraph? Something like `Ha et al published this about TitanCNA`

> - [gGNV](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/4404604788891-GermlineCNVCaller) This is a germline CNV calling tool that can be used on both WGS and WES data. This tool has booth COHORT and CASE modes. COHORT mode is used when providing a cohort of germline samples where CASE mode is used for individual samples. 

Reviewer: A lot of these tools can be used on WGS and WES data but we haven't really dove into that yet except for here. We might want to consider how we'd like to annotate which ones are NOT appropriate for WXS/WES data.

Reviewer: Can you link to the documentation about COHORT and CASE modes?

Author: That's a really good point about the WGS, WES distinction. I agree that since most of these tools can be used in both WGS and WES, it would be more useful to just annotate which are WGS specific 

the link provided is the only place I've found that goes into detail about COHORT and CASE modes  so I just refer back to that

> - [BIC-seq2](http://compbio.med.harvard.edu/BIC-seq/) This tool i used to detect CNVs with or without control samples. The steps involved in this data processing tool include normalization and CNV detection. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [BIC-seq2](http://compbio.med.harvard.edu/BIC-seq/) This tool is used to detect CNVs with or without control samples. The steps involved in this data processing tool include normalization and CNV detection. 
```

> Here are the tools frequently used to visualize the output data from the above tools: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Tools for visualizing the output data from the above tools
```

> - [IGV](https://software.broadinstitute.org/software/igv/) IGV is an interactive tool used to easily visualize genomic data. It is available as a desktop application, web application, and JavaScript to embed in web pages. This application is very beneficial for visualizing both mutational and CNV data for WGS. IGV has many [tutorials](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCb5W5WqauDOwubZHb-IA_rA/featured) on youtube that are helpful for using the tool to its full potential. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [IGV](https://software.broadinstitute.org/software/igv/) IGV is an interactive tool used to easily visualize genomic data. It is available as a desktop application, web application, and JavaScript to embed in web pages. This application is very beneficial for visualizing both mutational and CNV data for WGS. IGV has many [tutorials on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCb5W5WqauDOwubZHb-IA_rA/featured) that are helpful for using the tool to its full potential. 
```

- [Maftools](https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/devel/bioc/vignettes/maftools/inst/doc/maftools.html) Maftools is an R package that can be used to create informative plots from your WGS data output. It has tools to import both VCF files and ANNOVAR output for data analysis. 

> - [Prism](https://www.graphpad.com/scientific-software/prism/) Prism is a widely used tool in scientific research for organizing large datasets, generating plots, and creating readable figures. WGS data regarding mutations and CNV can be used as input for creating plots with this tool. 

Reviewer: This mention might get moved to a different chapter since it's not really specific to sequencing data. But we can leave it here for now. My plan is to have a chapter that generally discusses data analysis tools folks may want to consider. But we don't have that chapter up and running yet.

Author: that sounds good!

## Resources for WGS

> Online tutorials:

Reviewer: Excellent! I always love a good resources section. Do you want to make these bullet points?

- [Strelka2](https://github.com/Illumina/strelka) This is a small variant caller designed by Illumina. It is used for identifying germline variants in cohorts of samples and somatic variants in tumor/normal sample pairs. 
- [SomaticSniper](https://gmt.genome.wustl.edu/packages/somatic-sniper/) SomaticSniper can be used to identify SNPs in tumor/normal pairs. It calculates the probability that the tumor and normal genotypes are different and reports this probability as a somatic score. 
- [Pindel](https://www.sanger.ac.uk/tool/pindel/) Pindel is a tool that uses a pattern growth approach to detect breakpoints of large deletions, medium size insertsion/inversion, tandem duplications. 
- [Lancet](https://github.com/nygenome/lancet) This is a newer variant calling tool that uses colored de Bruijn graphs to jointly analyze tumor and normal pairs, offering strong indel detection. More information about the processes used in this variant calling tool can be found [here](https://www.nature.com/articles/s42003-018-0023-9)   

> Researchers may want to create a consensus file based on the mutation calls using multiple tools above. [OpenPBTA-analysis](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis/tree/master/analyses/snv-callers) is a tool that can be used for this purpose. It takes MAF files generated from the above mutation callers and identifies the overlapping hits. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Researchers may want to create a consensus file based on the mutation calls using multiple tools above. [OpenPBTA-analysis](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis/tree/master/analyses/snv-callers) shows an open source code example of how you might compare and contrast different SNV caller's results. 
```

- [gGNV](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/4404604788891-GermlineCNVCaller) This is a germline CNV calling tool that can be used on both WGS and WES data. This tool has booth COHORT and CASE modes. COHORT mode is used when providing a cohort of germline samples where CASE mode is used for individual samples. More details about these modes are described in the link above.  
- [BIC-seq2](http://compbio.med.harvard.edu/BIC-seq/) This tool is used to detect CNVs with or without control samples. The steps involved in this data processing tool include normalization and CNV detection. 

## Tools for data visualization

> These tools are often used in parellel to look at regions of the genome, develop plots, and create other relevant figures:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These tools are often used in parallel to look at regions of the genome, develop plots, and create other relevant figures:  
```
